# Data-Mining-and-Predictive-Analytics-Flight-Delays

Data Source: Acquired from Kaggle.com and generated by US Department of Transportation’s Bureau of Transportation Statistics. It comprised of flight logs (over 4 million records) for all domestic flights in the USA for the year 2015.

Fundamental goal of project was to create knowledgeable and actionable insight that travel insurance companies can use to price different flights differently depending on their likelihood to be delayed. This likelihood would translate to a higher probability of pay-out for the insurance company. This insight could be used by the insurance company to hike their premium on said variable combinations, routes or flights. Since this project relied heavily on the pay-out models of companies like Berkshire Hathaway Travel Insurance and similar companies, prediction models were created to mirror these actual business needs.

Performed data cleaning operation to eliminate any variables that did not add value or were posing a hindrance to the functioning of the predictive model to build like elimination of null values, data sub-setting, bucketing of time variables, elimination of cause variables and binning of dependent variable.

To overcome data sparsity problem due to lesser records of class of interest, used over-sampling and random data synthesis techniques to balance data before running models. 

Employed below specified models to performing analyses- 
Linear Regression, Forward & Backward Selection, Best Subset Selection, Ridge Regression, Lasso Regression, Regression Trees, Classification Trees, K-Nearest-Neighbors, Association Rule Mining
